[8.16] Updates docs for and related to the `excludedDataTiersForRuleExecution` advanced setting (#5962)
elastic/security-docs: docs/getting-started/advanced-setting.asciidoc

[discrete]
[[exclude-cold-frozen-data-rule-executions]]
== Exclude cold and frozen data from rules 

> To ensure the rules in your {kib} space exclude query results from cold and frozen tiers when executing, specify cold and frozen {ref}/data-tiers.html[data tiers] in the `excludedDataTiersForRuleExecution` field. Multiple data tiers must be separated by commas, for example: `data_frozen`, `data_cold`. This setting is turned off by default; turning it on can improve rule performance and reduce execution time. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To ensure the rules in your {kib} space exclude query results from cold and frozen tiers when executing, specify cold and frozen {ref}/data-tiers.html[data tiers] in the `excludedDataTiersForRuleExecution` field. Multiple data tiers must be separated by commas, for example: `"data_frozen", "data_cold"`. This setting is turned off by default; turning it on can improve rule performance and reduce execution time. 
```
Maybe I'm wrong but this would seem to better match the query example on the /detections-exclude-cold-frozen-data-tiers.asciidoc page

Author: We discussed this over Slack, and no further changes are needed. Resolving it for now.

> This setting does not apply to {ml} rules. 

Author: During my convo with @MikePaquette yesterday, he mentioned that ML results are stored in a system index that can't be modified by users. Maybe that detail is worth mentioning too? For example:

```suggestion
This setting does not apply to {ml} rules because {ml} anomalies are stored in a system index that is never frozen. 
```

> This setting does not apply to {ml} rules. 

Reviewer 2: It's not a system index. Suggest `This setting does not apply to {ml} rules because {ml} anomalies are not stored in cold or frozen.`

> This setting does not apply to {ml} rules. 

Author: Minor adjustment for specificity:

```suggestion
This setting does not apply to {ml} rules because {ml} anomalies are not stored in cold or frozen data tiers.
```

[TIP]
====

To only exclude cold and frozen data from specific rules, add a <<exclude-cold-frozen-data-individual-rules,Query DSL filter>> to the rules you want affected. 

====

> IMPORTANT: Even when the `excludedDataTiersForRuleExecution` advanced setting is enabled, indicator match, event correlation, and {esql} rules may still fail if a frozen or cold shard that matches the rule's specified index pattern is unavailable during rule executions. If failures occur, we recommend modifying the rule's index patterns to only match indices containing hot tier data.

Reviewer: I'm probably missing something but elsewhere in the PR it says "This method is not supported for {esql} and {ml} rules.", so just wanted to make sure it should really say ESQL here as well.

Author: You might be referring to the [DSL filter](ttps://security-docs_bk_5962.docs-preview.app.elstc.co/guide/en/security/master/exclude-cold-frozen-data-individual-rules.html) that users can add to individual rules if they only want specific rules to exclude cold/frozen data. The filter operates similarly to the `excludedDataTiersForRuleExecution` advanced setting but has a smaller scope and can't be used for ES|QL and machine learning rules.

[discrete]
[[exclude-cold-frozen-data-rule-executions]]

> == Exclude cold and frozen data from all rules 

Author: Mike P suggested removing all since it's not entirely correct

```suggestion
== Exclude cold and frozen data from rules 
```

[[exclude-cold-frozen-data-rule-executions]]

> == Exclude cold and frozen data from rule executions 

Reviewer 3: Since we have two different methods of excluding certain data tiers from rules, I think we should change the title to be `Exclude cold and frozen data from all rules` for the advanced setting, vs `Exclude cold and frozen data from a single rule` for the manual filter approach. This way users that follow the link from the manual page to here immediately understand why we have multiple approaches.

Author: Updated the title for the advanced setting in [203b0bb](https://github.com/elastic/security-docs/pull/5962/commits/203b0bb557f03206a480f4c0b70f6f854079d202).

This setting applies to all rules in a {kib} space. To only exclude cold and frozen data from specific rules, add a <<exclude-cold-frozen-data-individual-rules,Query DSL filter>> to the rules you want affected. 

====

> IMPORTANT: When the `excludedDataTiersForRuleExecution` advanced setting is enabled, indicator match, event correlation, and {esql} rules might fail if a frozen or cold shard that matches the rule's specified index pattern is unavailable during rule executions. The best path forward continues to be modifying the index patterns to only use hot tier data.

Author: Feedback from Mike.

```suggestion
IMPORTANT: Even when the `excludedDataTiersForRuleExecution` advanced setting is enabled, indicator match, event correlation, and {esql} rules may still fail if a frozen or cold shard that matches the rule's specified index pattern is unavailable during rule executions. If failures occur, we recommend modifying the rule's index patterns to only match indices containing hot tier data.
```

> IMPORTANT: When the `excludedDataTiersForRuleExecution` advanced setting is enabled, some rule types (specifically the indicator match, event correlation, and {esql} rule types) might fail if a frozen or cold shard that matches the rule's specified index pattern is unavailable during rule executions. The best path forward continues to be modifying the index patterns to only use hot tier data.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
IMPORTANT: When the `excludedDataTiersForRuleExecution` advanced setting is enabled, some rule types (specifically the indicator match, event correlation, and {esql} rule types) might fail if a frozen or cold shard that matches the rule's specified index pattern is unavailable during rule executions. The best path forward continues to be modifying the index patterns to only match data in the tiers you would like to target.
```

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
IMPORTANT: When the `excludedDataTiersForRuleExecution` advanced setting is enabled, indicator match, event correlation, and {esql} rules might fail if a frozen or cold shard that matches the rule's specified index pattern is unavailable during rule executions. The best path forward continues to be modifying the index patterns to only use hot tier data.
```
